 KBBFIO documentation TN105

1) Introduction

KBBFIO  is configured as  device 19 in the paged memory
operating  system and is only available when  the  disk
controller  module  is  connected. Its function  is  to
provide an  enhanced  keyboard driver with an interrupt
buffer,  and  the  ability  to  use  the  CONTROL/0  to
CONTROL/9 as additional function keys.

2) OPEN

Opening  for input has the  same effect as opening  for
output.  The   port   number is ignored.   A  parameter
string  containing   a decimal number may be  given  to
select  the  size of buffer.  If this is zero error 110
will  be returned. Otherwise a buffer will  be  created
out  of   that  number  of 256  byte  blocks  from  the
interrupt  buffer  management system. If  no  parameter
string  is   given then a default  buffer size  of  256
bytes  is   used.  An attempt to open device  19  twice
will fail  as  the   interrupt buffer management system
will raise a fault.

3) INPUT

When  reading  from the device the characters  will  be
read  from  the buffer according and  returned.  If  no
character  is available the device will wait untl a key
is pressed. If a 0 is returned this indicates an escape
and  the device should be read again. If a further 0 is
returned   this indicates either a genuine character  0
or alternatively  an invalid keyboard combination. If a
0  is  followed  by  90H  to  97H,  8EH  or  8FH,  this
indicates  that  CONTROL 0 to 9 respectively  has  been
pressed.  On some  keyboards (e.g. English) CONTROL and
'*' will  yield  a 0  followed  98H.

4) OUTPUT

Outputting   to  device  19  will change  the  keyboard
mode  as  in device 5 and 6. However in this case  bits
7, 5 and 4 are reserved for expansion, and bit 6 is  an
additional   TTYCAPS     bit.  This  will  effect   any
characters  which  are already in the  buffer,  because
characters are  stored untranslated in the buffer. This
does   not   effect   the  keyboard modes of  any  open
device  5  or   6  stream  nor  screen  editors  common
keyboard mode byte.

5) CLOSE

Closing  device 19 will deallocate the buffer. Any data
in it is lost.

6) Polling

The status of the buffer may  be tested by testing  bit
NRIST  (2)  of the appropriate byte in the system  page
status table.  If this is 0 a character is available in
the buffer and can be returned by device 19. If it is 1
the buffer is empty.  This method of polling provides a
much   more   efficient    facility  than  afforded  by
device 6.

7) Interaction with devices 5 & 6

Keyboard   data can still be read using devices 5 and 6
and the screen editor, without removing data from  that
which can be read by device 19. Thus keyboard input can
be read twice  over, and therefore extra care should be
taken  if either device 5 or 6 is open with device  19.

CSP 130583, GFG 301284
