CP/M utility documentation TN101

1)Introduction

This   document  refers  to   the programs provided  on
the  NewBrain   CP/M    system    diskette  that  where
produced  by  Grundy Business Systems.  These  programs
are  particular  to the  NewBrain CP/M system and  will
not  work  on any other CP/M system. In  addition  they
where  not  intended  to work with  the  NewBrain  MP/M
system  (programs compatible with both would be  issued
with  the  MP/M system). These programs should  not  be
used through  a networked system.


2)FORMAT

Blank  diskettes  must be formatted with  this  program
before use. When it is  invoked it will ask which drive
is to be used for the formatting operation. If you have
two   or  more  drives,  it is  recommended  to  use  a
different  one   to   A:.  Answer A,  B,  C,  or  D  as
appropriate  and press NEW LINE. The program will  then
ask  you to place a blank diskette in the stated  drive
and  press NEW LINE. If you have a single drive  system
it  is important at  this point to remove  your  system
diskette  and  place  a   blank diskette in the  drive,
otherwise  your system diskette will become  formatted.
To  avoid accidents it is a good idea to  write-protect
your  system diskette. If anything other than NEW  LINE
is  pressed  at  this point  control will return to the
first  question.    Once  NEW  LINE    is  pressed  the
diskette  will   be  formatted. At the  end  the  first
question  will  be reasked and you can  format  another
diskette.  If  you wish to exit the program  press  NEW
LINE.  Before   you  do this make sure  that  a  system
diskette is in drive  A  again.



Notes

i.  If  you have twin drives it is possible  to  insert
blank  diskettes  in  both  drives  and press <A>  <NEW
LINE>  <B>  <NEW LINE>. The type ahead buffer holds <B,
NEW  LINE>    until    the  first  diskette  has   been
formatted.

ii.   Exiting from the program by pressing NEW LINE  in
response  to  the request for drive  without  a  system
diskette  (see below)  in drive A will cause the system
to  hang.  This  usually requires   the  system  to  be
switched off.

iii.   This   formatting     program   does  not  check
write-readability  of  the diskette,  and  provides  no
assurance that the diskette  is ready to be written to.
The  most  common  fault is that the diskette  was  not
centred  correctly  when the drive   'door'  was  shut.
Failure  is  rare  (<1%) but  annoying.  Inserting  the
diskette  after   the  drive  has been  accessed  (i.e.
assures  that  the motor is already  spinning)  reduces
this  problem.     Try formatting the  faulty  diskette
again.  If  this  problem re-occurs then the  fault  is
either   the  diskette  itself  or  the   disk   drive.

3)SYSGEN

This   program  copies the  system information  on  the
reserved tracks  from  one  diskette   to another,  and
should usually  be run after formatting a new diskette.
The  information copied will include the  configuration
information   and    the      initial   command   line.

When  activated it will first ask for the letter of the
drive from which the system information is to be  read.
Enter  the letter  of the drive and press NEW LINE. The
system  information will then be read from that  drive.
It  will  then  asked where the information  is  to  be
written  to.  Answer  this in the  same  way,  and  the
information  will  then be written. This question  will
then be repeated. To exit the program press NEW LINE or
CONTROL/C.  At any point diskettes in the drives may be
removed or replaced as required.

Notes

i.   If  the  the  diskette   is incorrectly  formatted
then  SYSGEN  will  return a BDOS  error.  Insert  your
System  diskette   in  drive  A  and  press  CONTROL/C.

ii.   If software is supplied  by your dealer, software
houses, or friends it will not normally be sysgen.  The
system   tracks    also  include  your  license  number
(CP2-641-xxxx).  This  means  that you can  not  insert
this diskette and enter CP/M, i.e. cold start. However,
after  booting up  from your system master and provided
you do  not  warm  start   (by pressing CONTROL/C), you
will  be able to look at the directory of the  supplied
diskette.

iii.   DO  NOT sysgen  a  supplied diskette as you  may
damage   the   diskette  (e.g.  if  the   formats   are
different).  ALWAYS take  a copy of the diskette  first
(see DCOPY  and SCOPY below, and  PIP in the  'Handbook
For Disk Users', page 70).

4)SETINIT

This   program  will  set  up  an initial command  that
will  be executed by the CP/M system when  cold-booting
the  system.   For example, you may wish always to  use
WORDSTAR. When the  program is activated it will prompt
with  '>'. Type in the command you wish e.g.  "WS"  and
press  NEW  LINE.  If  you wish to  clear  the  initial
command just press  NEW LINE. The initial command  will
then  replace  the previous  one. To leave the  command
unchanged press  CONTROL/C. Note that  the command will
be   set  on   the diskette in drive A: only. To  place
it on other disks you must either repeat the program or
SYSGEN  to the other  diskettes.

5)EXIT

This   program  exits  the  CP/M system. In the case of
the     32K  CP/M  system  the  screen  will  go  blank
temporarily  before  restarting BASIC.  While  this  is
occuring  you  may press the stop key to re-enter  CP/M
instead  (as on powerup). With the 64K system the  main
menu  will reappear  and you can then select your  next
program.

6)SCOPY

This   is  a program that copies a  diskette  track  by
track when only a single drive is available. The method
is  to  fill the RAM with a much as possible  from  the
source diskette  and then write this to the destination
diskette.  When  the program is started up it will  say

"Press  newline to perform  disc copy or something else
to return to the system."

then,  if  newline was  pressed,

"Place  source  disk  in drive  A:, and press  a  key".

This   will  then  be  read,  and  then  it  will   say

"Place  destination disk in drive A:, and press a key".

This   will  then be written  to. The process  will  be
repeated, until at the end it will re-print the orginal
request.


7)DCOPY

This   is   a   program to  copy  a diskette  when  two
drives  are  available. When it starts up it  will  say

"Place   source  disc in drive A:, destination disc  in
drive B: and press newline to start copying or  anthing
else to   exit."

A  track by track operation  will then take place,  and
the request re-printed. This program will only work  on
two  similarly  configured drives (PIP should  be  used
otherwise).

Note

i.    If   'data   error'    appears  during  the  copy
process  this may not be serious. As the program  reads
track  for  track  the  fault may be  on  part  of  the
diskette  that is blank, or has part of an extinct file
on it.

8)SAVECON and RESTCON

Your  master diskette is supplied configured  for  twin
drives, either  twin 800K or twin  200K. If your system
is  different  then you can use CONFIGURE  (see  TN104,
NBUG3,  page15)  program to change  the  configuration.
Several  configurations have been created and  supplied
on your system master.

If  you only have a single  drive then it is  important
to  re-configure  as a single  drive system,  otherwise
there  will  be an appreciable delay whilst the  system
repeatly  looks   for  the non existant  second  drive.

e.g.

restcon cs80

This  new configuration does not take affect until  you
cold-start,  i.e.      exit        and  re-enter  CP/M.

On the 80 track master:-
  A       B            file
  80      -            cs80
  80      80           cs8080
  80      40 on 80     cs80408
  80      35 on 80     cs80358



On the 40 track master:-
  A       B            file
  40      -            cs40
  40      40           cs4040
  40      35           cs4035
  40      80           cs4080

Other files available are

cs80354  35 on B:80
cs8035D8 DS 35 on B:80
cs8040   NewBrain A:80/B:40
cs80TD48 Tuscan DS 40 on B:80
cs80TU44 Tuscan SS 40 on B:40
cs80TU88 Tuscan DS 80 on B:80

and  .CON files for twin 80 track, although most can be
quickly reconfigured using XCONFIG.

EPQX10
GEMINI80
KAYPRO
LYNX
MSDOS
PEGASUS
PIED
RML40
TEL803
TRNSTEC

If   you  require  a   different configuration (say 80,
40  and  40  track) then use  CONFIGURE  and  save  the
configuration on  your working master.

To   create  a  new  configuration file enter  (in  our
example)

savecon cs804040

This  reads the configure information from  the  system
tracks  on the diskette in drive A:, and saves it in  a
file  in hexadecimal. This is the reverse  of  RESTCON,
which  restores    a  previously  saved  configuration.

Note

To  re-configure your system from 40 track to 80.  This
is a requirement for users who up-grade their single 40
track   drive   to  80  or  twin   80   track   drives.

Your     single  40  track    drive    is  already  the
'terminated'  A:  drive.  'Terminated'  refers  to  the
resistor  pack on the circuit board of the drive.  Only
the  last drive on the cable has this resistor. Set the
80  track  drive  up as a B:  drive  (i.e.  remove  the
resistor  pack and select DS1 instead of DS0: refer  to
instructions  supplied with  the drive or contact  your
supplier).

Switch   on the system and  enter CP/M, with a copy  of
the CP/M master diskette in drive A:.

A>restcon cs4080

A>exit

This  is necessary to re-boot the information from  the
system  tracks. Re-enter CP/M. Insert  a blank 80 track
diskette in drive B: and format it.

A>PIP b:=a:*.*

Copy  all the system files to it

Now   restore  onto your 40  track diskette  cs8040  or
cs8080  if available, or using CONFIGURE (see TN104  in
NBUG3)  create   an  8080 set up.  This  can  be  saved
directly  to   the  B:   drive. However if you do  this
then SYSGEN the B: diskette with  the information  from
the A: diskette.

If    you  have  RESTCONed   then SYSGEN from drive  A:
to drive B:.

Now  re-wire your drives connecting the two  80  tracks
together  or swapping the 80 and 40 track drives.  Your
newly  created   diskette will now allow you  to  enter
CP/M.

It   is   far easier  to  do  than describe.  Remember,
that  in order to use the disk system the  diskette  in
drive A:  must  be configured correctly to your set up.
That  is  the diskette must be FORMATted, SYSGENed  and
correctly CONFIGURed.  Failing that, or otherwise  NBUG
is  able to create for you a master diskette configured
for  your  requirements from a copy  of  your  original
master.

CSP 130583, GFG 301284

