BASIC extensions with peripherals TN109

1) Expansion box

1.1) Memory

When  running  BASIC  under  the paged memory operating
system  the storage available for programs and data  is
40K.  This  is  not  affected  by  the  amount  of  I/O
facilities used. This  means that a large screen (up to
80 by 255) or a large high resolution graphics area, or
the   DISCIO  system can be used without affecting  the
40K available  to the user. This will be between  2000H
and  BFFFH. Space may  be RESERVEd as before at the top
of  the   area  which can be  used   for  machine  code
routines as before. Such routines can make system calls
as   described   in   the systems documentation without
pre- or  postamble.  The  pages will always be  present
so  that PEEK, POKE and CALL can be used as before.  In
addition the system page will always be present between
0 and 1FFFH  and can be PEEKed and POKEd.

1.2) SAVF

A   new  command SAVF is available (syntax the  is  the
same  as  SAVE). This will save the current program  in
such a  way that it will LOAD or MERGE faster. Programs
saved    using  SAVF will not  VERIFY.  Programs  saved
using  SAVF  can  be  LOADed by any BASIC. It  will  be
found that the speed increase obtained will be  greater
the larger  the program is.

1.3) EXIT

A   new  command EXIT will cause a return to  the  main
system  menu.  The current program and data  are  lost.


1.4) EXT[ERNAL]

A   new  command  EXTERNAL   and functions EXTERNAL and
EXTERNAL$ (EXT is a synonym for EXTERNAL)   exist. This
facility    allows access to subroutines and  functions
that are in add-on ROM librarys. The keyword is  always
 followed   by   the   name     of   the  routine.  Any
parameters should be enclosed in brackets and separated
by  commas.  EXTERNAL routines are unusual in that  the
parameters  may be used to return results. In this case
the parameters must be variables. It is not possible to
use a function with a string result parameter in a  DEF
statement.

Examples:

EXTERNAL shoot

EXT sound(x,y,z)

EXTERNAL      complexadd     (a(1),a(2),     b(1),b(2))

PRINT  EXT  e,  EXTERNAL parity(x)  ,  EXT$  spaces(20)

EXT exchange(a$,b$,c$)

The   following   new  error  numbers  may  be   given:

58)  Use  of  an EXTERNAL  subroutine  as  a  function.

59)  Use  of  an  EXTERNAL function  as  a  subroutine.

60)  The name of the requested EXTERNAL routine  cannot
be found in the attached library modules.

61) The EXTERNAL function being used delivers the wrong
type of result.

62)  Attempt  to  use a function with a  string  result
parameter within a DEF statement.

64) The type of parameter is wrong.

2) Disc controller

When   the  disc controller on its  own  is  connected,
BASIC  works  exactly as it does in a NewBrain  on  its
 own.  There  are  two additional commands, SAVF  which
is  as  described  above, and   CPM  which  immediately
enters the 32K CP/M system, losing the current  program
and data.

When    the   disc   controller    is  connected  to  a
NewBrain  with  an expansion box no  further  extension
than  is   described above occurs (the CPM command does
not exist). To enter  CP/M use EXIT and then enter CP/M
from   the  paged  system  menu.

When   the   disc   controller   is  connected  to  the
system, with or without an expansion box, devices 12-15
become     available  (see  DISCIO  documentation).  In
addition  commands  like   LOAD "PROGRAM" will use  the
disc  system   (device 12) to load  the program  rather
than  the cassette port. In this case the name  of  the
program  will  not  be displayed while  loading  and  a
filename  must be given  (simply saying LOAD  will  not
do).

To  load  or save programs  from cassette, device 1 has
to   opened   explicitly.  E.g.  to  load  a   program:

OPENIN#1,1,"PROGRAM"
LOAD#1
CLOSE#1

And to save a program:

OPENOUT#1,1,"PROGRAM"
SAVE#1:REM Could use SAVF here!
CLOSE#1

CSP 180483


