 CP/M system description TN102

1)  Introduction

The  NewBrain  CP/M  system operates  with  two  memory
configurations  - the 32K and 96K systems  only  (hence
the  normal CP/M utility MOVECPM is not required).  The
32K  system  requires a NewBrain A or AD and  a  floppy
disk  controller  with at least one floppy disk  drive.
The  96K  system (64K CP/M) requires, in addition,  the
expansion  box fitted with 64K extra RAM. Although  the
two  systems  work in the same way, you may  find  that
some  of  the CP/M programs  you wish to run will  only
operate  in the full 96K system. For example  WORDSTAR,
Microsoft BASIC  and Pro Pascal, will only run on a 64K
system.

The   same disks can be used  for either system, and no
re-configuration is  required.

The   transient  program  area  in the  32K  system  is
approximatley  24K    and    in     the   96K    system
approximately 57K.

2) Entering the CP/M system

With  the 32K CP/M  system  this can done by using  the
comand "CPM" from BASIC or by  pressing the stop key on
power  up.   The  96K  system can only  be  entered  by
selecting  "CP/M 2.2" from the system menu. The  system
information  will   be  read   from  drive  A  and  the
copyright  message  will  be displayed.  At this  point
if  an  initial  command has been set  by  the  SETINIT
program  it   will  be  executed.  Otherwise  the  CP/M
prompt "A>" will be displayed.

If   the  diskette has  not  been sysgened or is of the
wrong  format   for the drive  then   the  message  'No
response  from  disc controller', or 'data error'  will
be displayed.

3) The keyboard

The   keyboard  operates  in   a slightly different way
than  under normal conditions. The first thing is  that
control  codes   will operate as is  usual under  CP/M.
This  means  that, for example it  is  not  immediately
possible  to  change  the  mode  of  the  screen  using
CONTROL/W. To do this the codes have to be sent to  the
screen.  A trick  to get round this is to use the  fact
that  the   command   program  reflects  unrecognisable
commands.  If  you wish  say  to make the screen  black
on  white type following "A>" CONTROL/W, CONTROL/Q  and
newline.  The  screen will change followed by a "?"  to
indicate  that the control program doesn't  understand.
The  desired  effect will however have  been  achieved.

Since  the cursor control, home, insert and escape keys
are  really control keys, these will also not have  the
expected  effect,  unless  the program being  run  will
interprete them.  One effect is that cursor left  often
means  delete  the  character  on the left,  and  shift
cursor  left will often mean delete everything  on  the
left  up  to the prompt (if any). Many  programs  (e.g.
WORDSTAR)  will use  their own control keys for  cursor
movements.

The  NewBrain  keyboard  has  no 'delete' key. When the
delete  key  is refered to in CP/M documenation  or  in
CP/M  program documentation the control key  should  be
used with  the  comma key instead.

The  control  0 to 9 functions now have  new  meanings.
CONTROL/0 to CONTROL/7 have no effect (they are to have
special   meanings under MP/M). CONTROL/8 will set  and
unset  'capital letter lock'. When this mode is set all
letters  keyed  in will be  made into capitals  whether
or not the shift key is pressed. This is similar to the
old  CONTROL/1 function. Whenever this mode is set, the
mode ('TELETYPE  CAPS') will be displayed on the single
line  display  in  model AD NewBrains.  To  obtain  the
meanings  that  the CONTROL/0  to  CONTROL/9  keys  had
previously,   CONTROL/9      should    be       pressed
beforehand.

The   stop  key  has  no  effect (although the COP will
hold   the break key status if you return to BASIC  via
EXIT).

The     keyboard   operates  on  a  type-ahead  buffer,
which means that anything typed in will be stored until
the  next input  is required. The buffer is 256  bytes.
This can be useful if you know exactly what the program
requires   as  you  can type  ahead  of  the  displayed
menus. However it is also very easy to fill the  buffer
with cursor control codes as these keys auto-repeat (as
in  many CP/M word processors). Some programs clear the
buffer, insisting  that  you respond  to the  displayed
prompt.

4) Screen codes

The   screen  used  by  CP/M   is similar to the normal
screen  editor  except it is much  simpler,  and  hence
faster.  It  operates on 25 lines of 80 columns  screen
using  the normal character set. Characters  whose  top
bit  are  set  (i.e.  ASCII codes 128-255) will display
according  to   the  current   TV mode. When  the  last
column  has been typed to the cursor stays on the  last
character  but  changes  from  a line  to  a  block  to
indicate  that  the   next character typed will  appear
on  the  next  line.  Those  control codes  not  listed
below  will  perform no action at the moment, but  they
may  be   made  to  do something at a  later  time  and
should  be  avoided. The screen is compatible with  the
Lear-Siegler ADM-3A    terminal,   which   is available
as   an   option  in    many   installation   programs.

Note:   Screen   codes  only  work when written out  to
the  screen. Many CP/M programs can not take  advantage
of this   facility.

00H - Null. No action.

01H  -  Insert line.  The  lines below the current line
(if any) are scrolled down. The current line is cleared
and  the   cursor  is  moved to  the  left  hand  side.


02H   - Delete line. The  current line is  deleted  and
the  lines below (if any) are scrolled up. A blank line
is inserted at  the bottom of the screen.

03H  - Delete to the end of line. The character at  the
cursor  and all characters to the right of it (if  any)
are converted  to spaces.

05H   -  Cursor off.  The  cursor will cease to  flash.

06H  -  Cursor  on.  The cursor will  start  to  flash.

08H  - Backspace. The cursor  is moved one space to the
left,  or if it was on the left hand side to the  right
hand  side  but   one  of  the  above  line  (the  80th
character).  If the cursor was at the top-left  corner,
it is moved to the top-right corner.

09H   -   Tab.  Spaces are  printed  until  the  column
number  is  a  multiple of 8. A new line  is  taken  if
necessary.

0AH  - Cursor down. The cursor is moved one space down,
and if the cursor was at the bottom of the screen,  the
screen is  scrolled up and a blank line inserted at the
bottom.

0BH   -  Cursor up. The cursor  is moved up  one  line,
unless it was already at the top line.

0CH  - Cursor right. The  cursor is moved one  position
to the right, or if it was beyond the right most column
(with   block cursor) it is moved to the second  column
on the next  line.

0DH   -  Carriage  return.   The cursor is moved to the
left  of the current line.

11H   -  Insert  mode.   Further non-control characters
are inserted at the cursor position, with the character
previously at the cursor position and characters to the
right   of   it  moved to the  right.  Characters  over
flowing  the  right hand side of the screen  are  lost.
This mode  is cancelled when  another control character
is   sent.

14H   -   Escape.   The   following  character  is  not
interpreted  as a control code, except for 0, which  is
always ignored.

15H   -  Clear line. The  current line is written  with
spaces  and  the  cursor moved to the left  hand  side.

16H-   Set   cursor    position. Following this control
code  the next two characters sent are  interpreted  as
the  column  and row number to which the cursor  should
be set. The column number should be sent first. The top
row   is row 1 and the left  most column is  column  1.

17H   -  Set TV  mode.  Following this control code the
next character  sent will set the  TV control  register
whenever  that  screen is being displayed. Only bits  0
and 1 are  interpreted. Bit 0 determines the background
colour (0 means background dark, 1 background  bright).
Bit  1  determines  how characters with bit 7  set  are
interpreted  (0 gives reverse characters, 1 allows  256
character set).

18H  -  Delete left. The character to the left  of  the
cursor  is deleted and subsequent characters are  moved
one  position  to  the left. The cursor  is  moved  one
position  leftwards. If the cursor was in the  leftmost
column, no  action  is taken.

19H   - Delete. The character  at the cursor is deleted
and  subsequent  characters are moved one  position  to
the left.

1AH   -  Clear screen. The  screen is cleared  and  the
cursor is moved to the top left corner.


1BH   -  Escape  2.  If  this  is followed by  anything
other  than  '=' then no action is taken at the  moment
(these sequences  are reserved for expansion). If it is
followed   by   '='     then    a  conventional  cursor
positioning  takes    place,  with   the   row  address
followed  by the  column address. In this case the  top
left corner  is  at  20H,  20H.

1CH    -   Cursor   home  left.   As  carraige  return.

1DH  -  Cursor home  right.  The cursor is moved to the
right  most  column in the line  (with  block  cursor).

1EH  - Cursor home. The cursor is moved to the top left
corner.

1FH  -  Clear  screen.  As  1AH.

5) Other devices

In   the  32K  system  the   PTR: device is always  set
to  the printer port, and the RDR: and PUN: devices are
set to  the communications port. These are set to  work
at  9600 baud. In the 64K system the ports used will be
in  the expansion box will  be used instead, but  these
may   be   changed  by  using  the  CONFIGUR   program.

CSP 010683, GFG 301285
