 Z80  Port  Device  Driver  TN112
(NewBrain  Expansion Interface)

 General Description

The   Z80  Port  Device   Driver (Device Type 7) allows
a  single  INPUT  or OUTPUT to any given port  to  take
place in  response to each call to INPUT or OUTPUT.  On
the  unexpanded NewBrain, only the lower 8 bits of  the
address  line  are significant in such an IO  operation
at  the  Z80    level,  and  only  these  bits  may  be
determined  when  a  stream  of type  7  is  used.  The
enhanced  device  driver  provided  for  the   expanded
NewBrain  permits   the  user  to specify the  upper  8
bits  as well as the lower 8 bits of the port  address,
and  allows  more  than one stream to address any given
port  (to avoid  problems  which would otherwise  occur
when  a  user wished to address two ports which  differ
only   in   the  upper  8  bits  of   their   address).

The   port  address is  determined completely when  the
stream  is  opened, and cannot be  changed  thereafter.

 Compatibility

On   the  unexpanded NewBrain, the upper 8 bits of  the
address line are not determined and will in general  be
different  on  successive  IO operations.  However,  no
syntax error messages are given whatever the  parameter
string.  As no use  is made of the parameter string  in
the  unexpanded   device  driver,  this  difference  is
considered to be trivial.

 OPEN

Parameters     supplied   on  open  are   as   follows:

1  Device  Number  The device number of  the  Z80  Port
Device is 7.

2 Port Number The port number determines the value used
for  the lower 8  bits of the port address on INPUT  or
OUTPUT,  but  this  may be  changed  by  means  of  the
parameter string low-option, in order to open more than
one  stream with  the same value in the lower 8 bits of
the address.

3  Parameter String The parameter string must have  the
following  form:

parameter-string   ::=     [address-option]*

address-option    ::=  low-option ! high-option

low-option       ::= L number

high-option      ::= H number

number           ::= 0..255

 INPUT

One    byte   is  read  from   the specified  port  and
returned.

 OUTPUT

The   byte entered to the  device driver is written  to
the specified port.

 CLOSE

No action is taken.

               MJCA 15 Jul 83
