   Centronics Printer Driver TN111

 General Description

The  NewBrain expansion interface module and peripheral
interface  module    are    both   fitted   with  9-bit
parallel  output  ports. The Centronics  driver  allows
these  ports   to   be configured  to   the  Centronics
standard protocol.

Communications    between   driver and program  is  via
five standard IOS commands:

 OPEN

Parameters   supplied   on  open    are   as   follows:

1 Device Number

The  device  number  of the Centronics  driver  is  21.

2 Port Number

No   use   of  this is made by   the  device.  It  can,
however,  be  used  to create multiple  copies  of  the
device  (eg   one printer on  the  Expansion  Interface
Module  and  up to four others on Peripheral  Interface
Modules [up  to  four can be attached]).

3 Parameter String

The   parameter string must  have the  following  form:

parameter-string  ::=  [enviroment-  option]*

environment-option ::= printer-number or line-
        length or buffer-size

printer-number ::= C (0|1|2|3|4)

line-length    ::= L integer

buffer-size    ::= * integer

integer        ::= 0..255

Any    spaces  occuring  in   the parameter string  are
ignored.

 Printer Number

Printer   Number  0  is the printer  connected  to  the
expansion interface module.

Printers numbered 1 to 4 are the printers connected  to
peripheral modules 1 to 4 respectively.

If  a printer number outside this range is given in the
parameter string, error 195 is returned.

 Line Length

If  the line length is  non-zero, a new line  (0AH/0DH)
is   output  after  the  specified  number  of  printed
characters.  Tab  characters  (09H)  are  replaced   by
sufficient  spaces to bring  the print head position to
a  multiple   of   eight    characters  from  the  left
margin.

If   a   line  length of  zero  is requested, then  the
data appears on the printer port exactly as it is  sent
to  the  driver,   with no inserted line feeds  or  tab
expansion.

 Buffer Size

The    buffer   size   parameter specifies the  printer
buffer  capacity   as  a multiple of  256 bytes.  If  a
buffer size of  zero is requested, the printer will run
in direct (i.e. non-interrupt driven) mode. If there is
insufficient  memory  to  allocate  a  buffer  of   the
required  size, then the  buffer manager returns  error
120.

 Operational Notes

When   an attempt is made to open a Centronics  stream,
the  driver sends a series of null characters (00H)  to
the  printer  and  waits for a response.  If,  for  any
reason,  there   is   no reply (power  off,  cable  not
connected,  etc.), then STOP must be pressed to  regain
keyboard  control.   [This  obviously  also applies  if
you attempt to  enter CP/M that has been configured  to
expect a Centronics Printer.]

 Defaults

The  default  parameter  string  for  expansion  module
operation is:

"C0*1L255"

For  a  system  without an expansion  interface  module
(i.e.  fitted  with  a  single    Peripheral  Interface
Module)  the    printer  can  only  be  run  in  direct
(unbuffered)  mode    and    the  Peripheral  Interface
Module  is assumed to be number 1. As a result, only  a
line  length specification may appear in the  parameter
string, the  default being:

"L255"

If   a   printer number or  buffer size  is  explicitly
specified error 110 will be returned.

 INPUT

Since   the  printer  is an  output  only  device,  any
attempt  to  read from it will result in an  error  109
(System Error).

 OUTPUT

When   a   byte is output  to  the printer, the  8  bit
data  pattern  is  set up on the port  at  least  eight
microseconds  before   the falling edge of  the  strobe
pulse.  This    minimum   figure applies to the  direct
(un-buffered) mode of operation. THe set-up time for  a
buffered  printer   is substantially longer than  this.
The  duration of  the strobe pulse is guaranteed to  be
at least five microseconds.

 CLOSE

If  an  attempt  is made to close  a  buffered  printer
before  the  buffer is empty, then  the  close  routine
waits  until  the  printer is able to receive  all  the
remaining   data  before    deleting  the  buffer   and
returning  control to the user program. It is  possible
to  abandon this printing by pressing STOP.  This  will
cause the remainder of the contents of the buffer to be
discarded.

 Summary of Errors

The   Centronics device driver is liable to return  the
following errors:

Error 109 Attempt was made to read from printer.

Error  110  Syntax error in  parameter  string.

Error  120  Insufficient  memory  to  allocate  buffer.


Error  195  Printer   number    out  of  range.

 BUGs!

If  a buffered stream is  opened under BASIC it may not
be  possible to to boot CP/M from the  Expansion  Paged
System   Main  Menu  (although  the  disk  drives   are
accessed).

The   associated  buffer  is  not deleted if  the  user
presses  STOP  to  abort the transfer of  data  in  the
buffer at CLOSE time out  to the printer. As a result a
new stream can not be opened to that device and printer
number.  A second close, does in fact clear the buffer.

The user may have to switch  off at the mains. This  is
not serious, only annoying.

WFKN 050783,  GFG 170585
